# 3.1.4 Calls and called programs

## programs

### types

Called programs are structurally similar to other programs, except that they a re derivated form CalledProgram base class. They can be used in equally by 3 different types of programs:

- Online programs
- Batch programs
- Stored procedure

### passing: from caller point of view

When a program Caller has to call a program Called, it uses the following syntax:

```
call(.class) [.using()|.usingValue()|.usingLengthOf()]*.executeCall();
```

There can be as much variable passed as required.

called_program_class_name is the name of the class that is to be called. It's not a string, as giving the class name ensures by the compiler that the called program name is valid.

The following parameter passing is avalaible:

	- .using(): Passes a variable by reference: the variable in the called program will hold a pointer (or a reference) to the orignal variable passed by .using() method call. Then, when the variable in the called program is modified, the original value in the caller program is also modified.

	- .usingValue(): Passes a variable by value: the variable in the called program is filled-up with the value of the caller program's variable. Then, when the variable in the called program is modified, the original value in the caller program is NOT modified.

	- .usingLengthOf(): Passes the length of the provided variable to the called program.

Example:

```
call(TestCalledProgram.class).using(plaurech.plau_Rech).executeCall();
```

### passing: from called point of view

The called program must declare the parameters that it can receive in a ParamDeclaration line:
The syntax is:

```
ParamDeclaration callParameters = declare[.using()]+;
```

The number of .using() method calls must match the number of parameters passed by caller. The variables must be declared in the Linksage Section of the called program.

Fedined in file TestCallerProgram.java:

```
...
public class TestCallerProgram extends OnlineProgram
{
 DataSection workingstoragesection = declare.workingStorageSection() ; // (115) WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.

 PLAURECH plaurech = PLAURECH.Copy(this) ;
 ...
 public void procedureDivision()
 {
 ...
 call(TestCalledProgram.class).using(plaurech.plau_Rech).executeCall() ;
 ...
 }
 ...
}
```

The parameter passed by reference is given by the copy file PLAURECH. It's code is:
Defined in file PLAURECH.java:

```
public class PLAURECH extends Copy
{
 public static PLAURECH Copy(BaseProgram program)
 {
 return new PLAURECH(program, null);
 }
 public static PLAURECH Copy(BaseProgram program, CopyReplacing copyReplacing)
 {
 return new PLAURECH(program, copyReplacing);
 }
 public PLAURECH(BaseProgram program, CopyReplacing copyReplacing)
 {
 super(program, copyReplacing);
 }

 Var plau_Rech = declare.level(1).var() ;
 Var pr_Cdret = declare.level(5).picX(1).valueSpaces().var() ;
 Var pr_Input = declare.level(5).var() ;
 ...
}
```

```
...
public class TestCalledProgram extends CalledProgram
{
 DataSection WorkingStorage = declare.workingStorageSection();
 ...
 DataSection LinkageSection = declare.linkageSection();
 Var dfhcommarea = declare.level(1).var() ;
 Var plau_Rech = declare.level(3).var() ;
 Var pr_Cdret = declare.level(5).picX(1).var() ;
 Var pr_Input = declare.level(5).var() ;
 ...
 ParamDeclaration callParameters = declare.using(dfhcommarea);
 public void procedureDivision()
 {
 ....
 }
 ....
}
```

The called variable dfhcommarea acts as a reference on the plaurech.plau_Rech caller's variable. So, when dfhcommarea is modified, plaurech.plau_Rech is also modified.

This is implemented by mapping the buffer of dfhcommarea on the buffer of plaurech.plau_Rech. However, access on the dfhcommarea are based on the data typing of dfhcommarea, not on the data typing of the source variable (plaurech.plau_Rech). This means that semantic and padding rules of dfhcommarea are applied, not those of plaurech.plau_Rech. What's more, if dfhcommarea is defined as a larger structure than plaurech.plau_Rech, Caller write in dfhcommarea may override chars that are out of the scope of plaurech.plau_Rech.
