# 3.6.3 File Input - Output

Batch derivated programs can manipulate flat files.

After declaration within the FileSection, the program can manipulate records.

The following i/o operations can be done on a file:

	- Open

	- Close

	- Read

	- Write

	- Rewrite

What's more a file file can be operated in different modes:

	- Input

	- Output with append

	- Output without append

	- InputOutput

These operations are detailed here.

## used

The following file definition is used for next verbs explanations:

```
public class TestBatch extends BatchProgram 
{ 
 DataSection workingstoragesection = declare.workingStorageSection(); 

 Var enreg2 = declare.level(1).var(); 
 Var Name2 = declare.level(5).picX(10).var(); 
 Var Date2 = declare.level(5).pic9(8).comp3().var(); 
 Var Number2 = declare.level(5).pic9(4).comp().var(); 
 Var Length2 = declare.level(5).pic9(4).comp().var(); 
 Var Text2 = declare.level(5).variableLength().picX(1000).var() ; 
 ... 
 DataSection filesection = declare.fileSection(); 
 FileDescriptor fileIn = declare.file("FileTestIn"); 
 Var enreg = declare.level(1).var(); 
 Var Name = declare.level(5).picX(10).var(); 
 Var Date = declare.level(5).pic9(8).comp3().var(); 
 Var Number = declare.level(5).pic9(4).comp().var(); 
 Var Length = declare.level(5).pic9(4).comp().var(); 
 Var Text = declare.level(5).variableLength().picX(1000).var() ; 
 ... 
 FileDescriptorDepending fileIn$dependency = declare.fileDescriptorDepending(fileIn, Length); 
 ... 
 public void procedureDivision() 
 { 
 ...
```

## open

The file open call identifies an open mode, and the writability of the file.

Int he following code, the FileDescriptor_variable_name is the variable declared in the FileSection by

```
FileDescriptor FileDescriptor_variable_name = declare.file();
```

A program should not open a given file twice. This generates a non-fatal log error.

### read-only file

To open a file in input only:

```
.openInput();
```

The physical file must exists. If it's not the case, then an excpetion is thrown, the process exits, and a status code 8 is returned by the JVM.
The physical file name may be dummy.

Example:

```
fileIn.openInput();
```

### write only file

To open a file in output only:

```
.openOutput();
```

If the file doesn't exists, then it's created.
If the file exists and is declared in extended mode, then write operations will append records.
If the file exists and is not in extended mode, then the 1st write operation after open will erase the file.
When the file is opened, it's locked: This forbid another thread or process to write in this file.

Example:

```
fileIn.openOutput();
```

### write only file forced in extended mode

To open a file in output only, file record appending only:

```
.openExtend();
```

If the file doesn't exists, then it's created.
If the file exists, then write operations will append records.
When a file is open in that mode, the file definition's flag ,ext is ignored.

Example:

```
fileIn.openExtend();
```

### open a file in input and output

```
.openInputOutput();
```

If the file doesn't exists, then it's created.
If the file exists, then it's file position is set at the beginnig of file, and records may be read or re-write as required by the program.

Example:

```
fileIn.openInputOutput();
```

## close

When a program doesn't need a file resource anymore, it must close it.
The syntax is

```
.close();
```

If a program forgets to close a file, then an auto-close mecanism will be used to close the still open files. A log error will be issued. The program execution won't be affected.

Example:

```
fileIn.close();
```

## read

A file is read one record at a time.

There is 2 methods for reading a record form a file:

	- read(); : Reads the current record data.

		the data are set into the variable group at level 01 that immediatly follows the FileDescriptor_variable_name.

	- readInto(, ); Reads the current record data. The data is set in 2 variables groups:

		the variable group at level 01 that immediatly follows the FileDescriptor_variable_name

		- the variable named group_variable_name

Data are converted in ascii if the file is encoded in ebcdic. In fact, only alphanumeric fields are converted. These fields are identified by using the type of the children of the variable group at level 01. So, only picX, pic9 comp0 or picS9 comp0 typed children are converted from ebcdic to ascii. 
pic9 comp3 (packed decimal) and pic9 comp (binary encoded) are not converted, as nacaRT internal representation is the same as maineframe internal representation.

If a file is variable length, the variable groups are filled only with the number of bytes indicated by the record length header. The variable indentified by the declare.fileDescriptorDepending statement.

It is possibleto test for end of file condition by appending and texting the return value of a .atEnd() method call after a read or readInto call.

Example:

```
...
 fileIn.openInput();
 ...
 if(!read(fileIn).atEnd()) // variable group enreg is filled. We check for end of file condition
 {
 ... // We are not at end of file. 
 while(!readInto(fileIn, enreg2).atEnd()) // read next record; variable group enreg is filled; variable group enreg2 is also filled
 { 
 .... // handle records read
 }
 }
 // we have read all records form the input file
 fileIn.close();
 ...
```

## write

There is 2 methods for writing a record into a file:

	- write(); : Write the record given by level 01 following

		the data are set into the variable group at level 01 that immediatly follows the FileDescriptor_variable_name.

	- readInto(, ); Reads the current record data. The data is set in 2 variables groups:

		the variable group at level 01 that immediatly follows the FileDescriptor_variable_name

		- the variable named group_variable_name

If the file encoding is declared in ecbdic, then alphanumeric fields are converted from ascii to ebcdic and then written in ebcdic. The fields are identified by the types of the chidren of the varioable group. Only fields typed picX, pic9 coomp0 or picS9 comp0 are convertible form ascii to ebcdic.

Example:

```
...
 fileIn.openOutput();
 move(29, Length);
 move(..., enreg);
 write(fileIn); // write a record of 29 bytes long; the data are provided by enreg children; the fixed part is 19 bytes long, and the variable part is only 10 bytes long
 inc(Length);
 move(..., enreg2);
 writeFrom(fileIn, enreg2); // write a record of 30 bytes long; ; the data are provided by enreg2 children; the fixed part is 19 bytes long, and the variable part is only 11 bytes long
 fileIn.close();
 ...
```

## rewrite

This method enable to update a record of a given file. The file must have been open in input output mode. The record must have previously been read.

Example:

All records that have 0 in field Number are updated:

```
...
 fileIn.openInputOuput();
 ...
 while(!read(fileIn).atEnd()) // variable group enreg is filled. We check for end of file condition
 {
 if(isEqual(Number, 0)) // record have a 0 in field Number must be updated
 { 
 ... // 
 move(1, Number);
 rewrite(fileIn);
 }
 }
 fileIn.close();
 ...
```
