# 3.4.1 SQL - non cursor statements

These statement acts only on a resultset of 0 or 1 record

The select statement specifies ate least one table and must return 0 or 1 record. A selection of coulumns is provided. It can be *, or a mix of * and column names from a separe table.

It can specify where parameters that act as a filter to find the matching record.

```
sql("SELECT count(*) FROM Customer)
 .into(wQty);
```

This clause returns the number of records of table Customer in colbol-like variable wQty. No error handling is done.

### 2:

```
sql("SELECT PhoneNumber, Name FROM Customer WHERE Id = #1)
 .into(wPhoneNumber)
 .into(wName)
 .param(1, wId)
 .onErrorGoto(paragraphSQLErrorHandler);
```

This clause select 1 record matching a given customer id. the cobol-like variables wPhoneNumber and wName are filled on return.
If no customer having an id wId, then a goto to paragraph paragraphSQLErrorHandler is done.

```
h3. Example 3:
{code:java}
sql("SELECT count(*) FROM Customer WHERE Id = #1)
 .into(wPhoneNumber)
 .into(wName)
 .param(1, wId)
 .onErrorGoto(paragraphSQLErrorHandler);
```

This clause select 1 record matching a given customer id. the cobol-like variables wPhoneNumber and wName are filled on return.
If no customer having an id wId, then a goto to paragraph paragraphSQLErrorHandler is done.

### 4:

```
sql("SELECT * FROM RS0501 WHERE CDSTE = #1 AND CDCENPR = #2 AND CDNIVRG = #3 AND CDRGRP ^= #4")
 .into(vrs0501b.dvrs0501b)
 .param(1, vrs0501b.cdste)
 .param(2, vrs0501b.cdcenpr)
 .param(3, rs05a01s.sutirgrn)
 .param(4, rs05a01s.sutirgr01)
 .onErrorGoto(paragraphSQLErrorHandler);
```

In that sample, there is 4 parameters that will be used for filtering:

	- vrs0501b.cdste is set as a filter of column CDSTE.

	- vrs0501b.cdcenpr is set as a filter of column CDCENPR.

	- rs05a01s.sutirgrn is set as a filter of column CDNIVRG.

	- rs05a01s.sutirgr01 is set as a filter of column CDRGRP.
The type of the parameters-variable must be consistent with the type of the underlying table's column. NacaRT and JDBC does resonable conversions if required, but with some limitations

As it's a select statement, only 0 or 1 record can be returned.

After execution of the statement, we get a result sert of 0 or 1 record. Getting more than 1 record generates an error, as such a select statement is limited to a single record return. This error can be catched by onErrorGoto() method call.

If we get 1 record in the resultset, then cobol-like variables of the group vrs0501b.dvrs0501b will be filled.
As we have a "select *" statement , then the resultset's table column name is used to find variables of the same name within the group vrs0501b.dvrs0501b. Only variables of the same name as the column's name are filled.

### 5:

It is possible to have both * and column names as for example:

```
sql("SELECT X.*, Y.NMCOLL FROM RS0104 X, RS0103 Y WHERE X.CDPROJ = Y.CDPROJ")
 .into(dvrs0104a)
 .into(vnm)
```

Where :

	- dvrs0104a is a group whose some (or all) children have the same name as the columns of table RS0104. Only the children that have a column with the same name will be filled. Name comporarison is case insensitive.

	- vnm is a variable that will be filled by the value of the column NMCOLL. As it's not a group, there is no name matching done.

## statement

The statement is simple:

```
sql("INSERT INTO RS7A00(UTISTE, UTIENTO, CDENUM, CORNUM) VALUES (#1, #2, #3, #4)")
 .value(1, vrs7a000.utiste)
 .value(2, vrs7a000.utiento)
 .value(3, vrs7a000.cdenum)
 .value(4, vrs7a000.cornum)
 .onErrorGoto(erreur_Db2);
```

All column values are passed as parameter by cahined value() method calls. The number obvioulsy refers to the #number of the sql statement.

This statement must give 2 kinds of informations:

	- column's values: it's given by value() calls.

	- where parameters: it's given by param() calls.

```
sql("UPDATE FUF101 SET OFEVAPR = #1, OFEVAFR = #2, OFEUMS = #3, MUTDAT = #4 WHERE UTISTE = #5 AND UTIENTJ = #6")
 .value(1, vfuf101d.ofevapr)
 .value(2, vfuf101d.ofevafr)
 .value(3, vfuf101d.ofeums)
 .value(4, vfuf101d.mutdat)
 .param(5, vfuf101d.utiste)
 .param(6, vfuf101d.utientj)
 .onErrorGoto(db2_Fehler);
```

There is only where param to provide.

```
sql("DELETE FROM FUF104 WHERE UTISTE = #1 AND UTIENTJ = #2 AND EDIDAT = #3 AND JNLCOD = #4 AND EDIGRCD = #5 AND OFEUTYP = #6")
 .param(1, vfuf104a.utiste)
 .param(2, vfuf104a.utientj)
 .param(3, w_Edidat)
 .param(4, vfuf104a.jnlcod)
 .param(5, vfuf104a.edigrcd)
 .param(6, vfuf104a.ofeutyp)
 .onErrorGoto(db2_Fehler) ;
```
